# Chapter 6. The Memory Hierarchy #

## 6.1 Storage Technologies ##

### 6.1.1 Random Access Memory ###

#### Static RAM ####

**SRAM**  stores each bit in a _bistable_ memory cell. Each cell is implemented with a **six-transistor** circuit.

#### Dynamic RAM ####

**DRAM** stores each bit as charge on a capacitor.

A DRAM memory cell is very sensitive to any disturbance. When the capacitor voltage is disturbed, it will never recover.

#### Conventional DRAMs ####

#### Memory Modules ####


#### Nonvolatile Memory ####

DRAMs and SRAMs are _volatile_ in the sense they lose their information if the supply voltage is turned off.
_Nonvolatile Memories_ retain their information even when they are powed off. which refered to **ROMs** (read-only memories, for historical reasons), some types of ROMs can be written as well as read.

_programmable ROM (PROM)_ can be programmed exactly once. 

_erasable programming ROM_ (EPROM) has a transparent quartz window that permits light to reach the storage cells. cleared to zeros by ultraviolet light through the window

_electrically EPROM (EEPROM)_ is akin to an EPROM without physically programming device required.

_Flash memory_, based on EEPROMs. _solid state disk (SSD)_


Programs stored in ROM devices are often referred to as _firmware_ .

Complicated devices such as graphics cards and disk drive controllers also rely on firmware to translate I/O (input/output) requests from the CPU.

#### Accessing Main Memory ####

A _read transaction_ transfers data from the main memory to the CPU. A _write transaction_ transfers data from the CPU to the main memory.


The main components are the CPU chip, a chipset we will call an _I/O bridge_ (which includes the memory controller), and the DRAM memory modules that make up main memory.


CPU performs a load operation:
```asm
movq A, %rax
```

CPU performs a store operation:
```asm
movq %rax, A
```

### 6.1.2 Disk Storage ###

- _Seek time_. To read the contents of some target sector, the arm first positions the head over the track that contains the target sector.

- _Rotational latency_. Once the head is in position over the track, the drive waits for the first bit of the target sector to pass under the head.

$$
\begin{align}
&T_{\text{max rotation}} = \frac{1}{\text{RPM}} \times \frac{60 \; \text{secs}}{1 \; \text{min}} \\
&T_{\text{avg rotation }} = \frac{1}{2} \times T_{\text{max rotation}}
\end{align}
$$


- _Transfer time_. When the first bit of the target sector is under the head, the drive can begin to read or write the contents of the sector.

$$
T_{\text{avg transfer}} = \frac{1}{\text{RPM}} \times \frac{1}{\text{average number of sectors/track}} \times \frac{60 \; \text{secs}}{1 \; \text{min}}
$$

#### Disk Operation ####

##### Practice Problem 6.3 #####

Estimate the average time (in ms) to access a sector on the following disk

| Parameter                       | Value     |
|---------------------------------|-----------|
| Rotational rate                 | 15000 RPM |
| $T_\text{avg seek}$             | 8 ms      |
| Average number of sectors/track | 500       |

- Solution:
$$
\begin{aligned}
T_\text{access} &= T_\text{avg seek} + T_\text{avg rotation} + T_\text{avg transfer} \\
                &= 8 + \frac{1}{2} \times \frac{60}{15000} \times 1000 \text{ms} /\sec + \frac{60}{15000} \times \frac{1}{500} \times 1000 \text{ms} / \sec \\
                &= 8 + 2 + 0.008 \\
                &= 10.008 \; \text{ms}
\end{aligned}
$$


## 6.2 Locality ##

## 6.3 The Memory Hierarchy ##

## 6.4 Cache Memories ##

## 6.5 Writing Cache-Friendly Code ##

## 6.6 Putting It Together: The Impact of Caches on Program Performance ##

## 6.7 Summary ##

