# 6 Mechanism: Limited Direct Execution

<!--toc:start-->
- [6 Mechanism: Limited Direct Execution](#6-mechanism-limited-direct-execution)
  - [6.1 Basic Technique: Limited Direct Execution](#61-basic-technique-limited-direct-execution)
  - [6.2 Problem #1: Restricted Operations](#62-problem-1-restricted-operations)
  - [6.3 Problem #2: Switching Between Processes](#63-problem-2-switching-between-processes)
    - [Saving and Restoring Context](#saving-and-restoring-context)
<!--toc:end-->

## 6.1 Basic Technique: Limited Direct Execution

problems to virtualize the CPU:

- make sure program doesn't do anything should not be done while still running it efficiently
- how operating system stop and switch to another process.

## 6.2 Problem #1: Restricted Operations

- **user mdoe** : applications do not have full access to hardware resources.
- **kernel mode** : the OS has access to the full resources of the machine.
- **system call** : make user process perform some kinds of privileged operation, such as reading from disk.
  - **trap** instruction: simultaneously jumps into the kernel and raises the privilege level to kernel mode.
    - **return-from-trap** : returns into the calling user program while simultaneously reducing the privilege level back to user mode when finished.
    - **kernel stack** : pushed the program counter, flags, and a few other registers onto a per-process **kernel stack** for **return-from-trap** to pop to resume execution of the user-mode program.
    - **trap table** : setting up at boot time for **trap** to know which code to run.
  - **system call number** : assigned to each system call to specify the exact system call.

<br/>

<div style={{display: 'flex', justifyContent: 'left'}}>

<table align="center">
  <tr><th>OS @ boot <br/>
          (kernel mode)</th><th>Hardware</th><td/></tr>
  <tr><td>initialize the table</td><td>remember address of sycall handler</td><td/></tr>

  <tr><th>OS @ run <br/>(kernel mode)</th><th>Hardware</th><th>Program <br/>(user mode)</th></tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Create entry for process list<br/>
        Allocate memory for program<br/>
        Load program into memory<br/>
        Setup user stack with argv<br/>
        Fill kernel stack with reg/PC<br/>
        return-from-trap </td>
    <td/>
    <td/>
  </tr>

  <tr>
    <td/>
    <td>
    restore regs<br/>
    (from kernel stack)<br/>
    move to user mode<br/>
    jump to main<br/>
    </td>
    <td/>
  </tr>

  <tr>
    <td/>
    <td/>
    <td>
    Run main()<br/>
    ...<br/>
    Call system call<br/>
    trap into OS<br/>
    </td>
  </tr>

  <tr>
    <td/>
    <td>
    save regs<br/>
    (to kernel stack)<br/>
    move to kernel mode<br/>
    jump to trap handler<br/>
    </td>
    <td/>
  </tr>

  <tr>
    <td>
    Handle trap<br/>
     Do work of system call <br/>
    return-from-trap<br/>
    </td>
    <td/>
    <td/>
  </tr>

  <tr>
    <td/>
    <td>
    restore regs<br/>
    (from kern mode><br/>
    move to user mode<br/>
    jump to PC after trap<br/>
    </td>
    <td/>
  </tr>

  <tr>
    <td/>
    <td/>
    <td>
    ...<br/>
    return from main()<br/>
    trap(via exit())<br/>
    </td>
  </tr>

  <tr>
    <td>
    Free memory of process<br/>
    Remvoe from process list<br/>
    </td>
    <td/>
    <td/>
  </tr>
</table>

</div>

<div style={{textAlign:'center'}}>

Figure 6.2: **Limited Direct Execution Protocol**

</div>

## 6.3 Problem #2: Switching Between Processes

```
How can the operating system regain contraol of the CPU so that it can switch between process?
```

### Saving and Restoring Context

By switching stacks, the kernel enters the call to the switch code in the context of one process and returns int he context of another.
