# 7 Scheduling: Introduction

## 7.1 Workload Assumptions

a number of simplifying assumptions about the processes running in the system,
sometimes collectively called the workload.

a **fully-operational scheduling discipline**

1. Each job runs for the same amount of time.
2. All jobs arrive at the same time.
3. Once started, each job runs to completion.
4. All jobs only use the CPU.
5. The run-time of each job is known.

## 7.2 Scheduling Metrics

the **trunaround time** of a job is defined as the time at which the job completes minus the time at which the job arrived in the system.

$$
T_{turnaround} = T_{completion} - T_{arrival}
$$

## 7.3 First In, First Out (FIFO)

The most basic algorithm we can implement.

The problem is **convoy effect**, where a number of relatively-short potential consumers of resource get queued behind a heavyweight resource consumer.

## 7.4 Shortest Job First (SJF)

runs the shortest job first, then the next shortest, and so on.

The problem is even though the shorter tasks (B and C) arrived shortly after the longer one (A), they still have to wait until A has completed.

## 7.5 Shortest Time-to-Completion First (STCF)

Any time a new job enters the system, the STCF scheduler determines which of the remaining jobs (including the new job) has the least time left,
and schedules that one.

## 7.6 A New Metric: Response Time

the time from when the job arrives in a system to the first time it is scheduled.

$$
T_{response} = T_{firstrun} - T_{arrival}
$$

If three jobs arrive at the same time, the third job has to wait for the previous two jobs to run _in their entirely_ before being scheduled just once.

## 7.7 Round Robin

The basic idea: instead of running jobs to completion, RR runs a job for a **time slice** (sometimes called a **scheduling quantum** )
and then swithes to the next job in the run queue.

- the length of the time slice is critical for RR.
- RR is indeed one of the _worst_ policies if turnaround time is our metric.
  turnaround time only cares about when jobs finish, RR is nearly pessimal, even worse than simple FIFO in many cases.
- if you are willing to be unfair, you can run shorter jobs to completion, but at the cost of response time;
  if you instead value fairness, response time is lowered, but at the cost of trunaround time.

switching to another job causes this state (CPU caches, TLBs, branch predictors, and other on-chip hardware) to be flushed and new state relevant to the
currently-running job to be brought in may exact a noticeable performance cost.

## 7.8 Incorporating I/O

allows for **overlap**, with the CPU being used by one process while wwwaiting for the I/O of another process to complete.

## 7.9 No More Oracle

In fact, in a general-purpose OS (like the ones we care about), the OS usually knows very little about the length of each job.

- how can we build an approach that behaves SJF/STCF without such a _priori_ knowledge ?
- how can we incorporate some of the ideas we have seen with the RR scheduler so that response time is also good ?

## 7.10 Summary

The scheduler is known as the **multi-level feedback queue**
