# 8 Scheduling: The Multi-Level Feedback Queue

## 8.1 MLFQ: Basic Rules

- **Rule 1** : If Priority(A) > Priority(B), A runs (B doesn't)
- **Rule 2** : If Priority(A) = Priority(B), A & B run in RR

## 8.2 Attempt #1: How to Change Priority

- **Rule 3** : When a job enters the system, it is placed at the highest priority ( the topmost queue).
- **Rule 4a** : If a job uses up an entire time slice while running, its priority is reduced
- **Rule 4b** : If a job gives up the CPU before the time slice is up, it stays at the _same_ priority level.

## 8.3 Attempt #2: The Priority Boost

- **Rule 5** : After some time period _S_, move all the jobs in the system to the topmost queue.

## 8.4 Attempt #3: Better Accounting

- **Rule 4** : Once a job uses up its time allotment at a given level (regardless of how many times it has given up the CPU), its priority is reduced (i.e, it moves down one queue)

## 8.5 Turning MLFQ And Other Issues

how to **parameterize** such a scheduler.

- how many queues should there be ?
- how big should the time slice per queue?

allow for varying time-slice length across different queues.

- how often should priority be boosted in order to avoid starvation and account for changes in behavior?

Time-Sharing scheduling class, it provides a set of tables that determines different parameters

## 8.6 Summary

- **Rule 1** : If Priority(A) > Priority(B), A runs (B doesn't)
- **Rule 2** : If Priority(A) = Priority(B), A & B run in RR
- **Rule 3** : When a job enters the system, it is placed at the highest priority ( the topmost queue).
- **Rule 4** : Once a job uses up its time allotment at a given level (regardless of how many times it has given up the CPU), its priority is reduced (i.e, it moves down one queue)
- **Rule 4** : Once a job uses up its time allotment at a given level (regardless of how many times it has given up the CPU), its priority is reduced (i.e, it moves down one queue)
